the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware
at
ocw.mit.edu so welcome to this
week um we're going to talk about number
Theory actually before I forget there
are some handouts at the very back so
please raise your hand if you don't have
any then one of us can actually come
over and hand you out uh this sheet
which contains some facts about the
visibility thanks a lot and um we will
be using these throughout the
lecture so today we're going to talk
about number Theory and this is a really
different way of thinking actually but
we will use the same Concepts as you
have learned before like indu and
invariance stuff like that to prove all
theorems so what is number
Theory well first of all it's a very old
science one of the oldest mathematical
disciplines and uh only recently it
actually got to have some more practical
applications so what is number Theory
it's actually the
study
of the integers
and what are the integers well these are
the numbers 0 1 2 3 and so
on so number Theory got uh oh there's
some more over
here another hand out over
there so number Theory uh got uh uh used
actually in cryptography only about uh
40 years
ago and uh at the end of the second
lecture we we will be talking about uh
this application into cryptography there
are many application in in cryptography
but we will be talking about one of them
to show you how useful this actually is
now cryptography is uh the study and uh
practice of hiding numbers and you can
imagine how important that is um we have
uh like medical data that we need to uh
store outside in the cloud right so gee
do do we really want that we actually
want to hide our
information we do not want others who
are not allowed to see my private
information to see it so this art of
hiding information is extremely
important especially nowadays and number
Theory actually will help us with it so
number Theory uh is uh something you'll
be very surprised that can be used to um
to save uh oops I have to put this on to
save New York City in die heart number
three I believe so let me start up again
[Music]
um so let's see where it
plays maybe
not yeah go let's go ahead and grab it
you're the cop Sim how you're supposed
to be helping with this I'm helping when
you going to start helping after you get
the
[Music]
bomb careful be careful don't open it
what I got to open it and it's going to
be all right
[Music]
I told you not to open
it I Tri to see the message it has a
proximity circuit so please don't drop
yeah I I got it we're not going to run
now we turn this thing off on the
fountain they should should be two jugs
do you see them a 5 gallon and a three
gallon fill one of the jugs with exactly
four gallons of water and place it on
the scale and the timer will stop you
must be precise 1 o or more or less will
result in detonation if you're still
alive in 5 minutes we'll speak wait wait
a
second I don't get it you get it
no get the jugs
obviously we can't fill the three gallon
jug with four gallons of water right
obviously all right I know there we go
we fill the three gallon jug exactly to
the top right uhhuh okay now we pour
that three gallons into the 5 Gall jug
giving us exactly 3 gallons in the 5
gallon jug right right then what now
take the three gallon jug fill it a
third of the way up no he said be
precise exactly po G coping 50 mil is
running his ass off and I'm out here
playing kids games in the park hey
you want to focus on the problem at
hand all right you can imagine what we
are going to do right here right
so you can imagine what's below this
table that's a
bump you guys have to save
6042 so we have the fountain here each
tennis ball is one gallon of water we
have a big jug five gallons and three
gallons so y all got to help me out here
so who is an idea of what we can do
so all right let's let's first do that
fill up the three
gallon let's pour it in
five maybe someone else can uh can
continue over there uh if we do the same
again we'll end up with just one gallon
in the three gallon ahuh so let's do
that because it's true right we can uh
only fill it up to five gallons so only
at most two gallons can add to this
exactly two gallons or one gallon is
left all right next one you like to out
five take out the five all
[Music]
right and then what put the one over
here then fill the three gallon and put
it into the five
all right that's great and I fill it up
right here fantastic so we actually have
four gallons
here and luckily we are saved right so
you you saved thank God
6042 H so we can
continue um so this is actually uh
pretty amazing though how can we get
four gallons out of a three gallon jug
and a five gallon jug and that's what we
are going to talk about in more
generality actually and um if you would
just change it a little bit right then
things would get more difficult for
example if you would
change the five gallon jug into a six
gallon jug can we still get four
gallons no why
not everything has to be multiples of
three that's exactly right uh this is a
multiple of three 1 * 3 this is 2 * 3 so
if I do combinations with those like
pouring one into the other completely or
emptying or filling up we always will
have a multiple of three gallons in
either one of those or both so it can
never have four gallons so this is
something uh that we would like to
analyze a little bit more and to do that
we're going to first of all uh start
with the definition actually you can put
up the screen over
here so let me take that
out uh can someone up there uh pull up
the
screen Maybe not maybe later all right
so let's go with the
definition
um we say and denote by m and a bar and
a we
mean M
divides
a and how how do we Define this well we
say that M divides a if and only
if there exists an integer K such that a
can be written as a multiple of M namely
K *
m
so if you look at this uh at this
definition we for example have that 3/ 6
like what we just discussed there's
something interesting going on so
suppose um a is equal to
zero well any integer will divide a will
defi zero why is that because I can take
K to be equal to zero so this is equal
to 0 times any integer M so m divid z
for all integers so that's kind of the
exception right and uh we are going to
use this to uh set up a theorem and
analyze this whole situation over
here now in order to do that we will
need to uh sort of uh Define what we can
do with all this so there are a States
we will Define a state machine we will
see what kind of possible transitions we
can have and once we have modeled all
this very precisely we can start proving
stuff now let me first of all uh write
out what our assumptions are
so
suppose we have a uh a gallon
jug so in our case a equals
3 and we have also a b gallon
jug and in our case b equals 5 right and
we assume that a is at most
B that is sort of the situ sitation that
we working with and you would like to
prove a
theorem exactly what we noticed over
here that three divides both the three
gallon jug and the six gallon jug we
would like to prove something like this
if M divides a and
also M divides B
well then M should divide any result
that I can get
with the pouring and emptying and
filling those jugs so this is the
theorem that we would like to prove and
we can only do that if we start to have
a proper model for this so let's go for
that and
um and uh well the state machine that
we're going to use here looks like this
first of
all the states that we have are the
number of gallons that are in these two
jugs so we will denote those by
pairs pairs X comma
Y
and X
denotes the number of gallons in the a
gallon
ja the number of gallons in
let me abbreviate that by the
A and Y is the number of
[Music]
gallons in the
BJ so these are the states and uh the
start state is exactly as it is right
there we have nothing in either of the
jugs so that's the pair 0 comma 0 so now
we start to build up some mathematics
here right so we uh Express the state of
this whole situation by a pair of
numbers now we need to find out what we
can do with it so what are the
transitions the transitions are as we
have seen right we can just fill one of
the JS we can empty those and the other
possibility is that we can pour one J
over into the other one as much as we
can so so let's write all of those
out we can do emptying well how does
that change a
state if we have X gallons in this Chuck
and Y and over y gallons in that one we
can transition this into for example
emptying the a gallon jug so we have
zero
or we can empty the uh BJ
well filling is something
similar but now we are
actually pouring in more uh water from
the fountain essentially right all those
tennis balls here
and we can fill up say the a gallon jug
up to a gallons and leave the B jug as
it is
or we can fill up the B gallon jug and
leave the a gallon jug as it is so these
are these two
Transitions and um the pouring of one g
of one jug into the other is actually a
little bit more complex so let's have a
look so how does pouring work well uh
suppose we
start with X and Y so let's have a look
here um I don't know suppose we have two
balls in here and two balls in
here well in that case I can say pour
all of this over in here right so that's
easy but there's also other possibility
whether when I pour all of this over in
here but hey I can only put in one ball
because this is only a three gallon jug
so I'm left with only
one gallon in that in in in in in this
jug so these are two these are two
situations that we need to explain so
let's first do the first example that I
just did I P everything over into the
other jug
so we have zero gallons left in here and
X+ y gallons left in the other
jck and that can only happen if there is
sufficient space right so this can only
happen if x + y is at most B which is
the capacity of this B gallon jug
now if that's not the case then I can
pour in just a little bit like just say
one ball like uh just one of these can
go in here so that's the other case
so um XY will actually go to well let's
see how that
works how many gallons are left in this
B gallon jug to fill up well we have B
minus y gallons Left Right space left so
we can take B minus y gallons out of
this one to fill up this one so let's do
it we take B minus y gallons out of the
AJ and put it all in here and that makes
it completely filled up so we have B
gallons over here so this is really
equal to x + y -
B comma B and this only uh is possible
if uh if we are essentially in the
complimentary case so we have
that x + y is at least
B such that there is enough gallons in
uh the a
jug to be pulled over to fill up the B
jug so these are the two kinds of cases
and of course by symmetry we can do also
the pouring from the other jug in into
the first so let's write all those out
as well so XY can actually go to X+ y
comma 0 I put everything from here to
there and uh this only holds if x + y is
at most
a the other possibility is where uh
exactly is in this case we can only pour
s uh B uh a minus X gallons over from Y
into this particular Chu and then this
one is completely filled up and I have a
few gallons left over here so how does
that look
well we completely filled this up uh up
to its
capacity and what is left is y minus how
much did we had to pour in here well
that's aus
X and we again have a similar
formula but it now looks a little bit
different x + y - A and this is only for
the case where X + Y is
um at least
a okay so these are all the cases so
maybe there are some questions about
this is this clear that we have these
different possibilities like when we
look at these JS we can either empty
them filling them up or we can pour say
only one ball over up to the full
capacity of this jug or we can just pour
everything over into say this jug so
those are the different cases that are
now fully described by the state machine
so now we can start to prove this
theorem over here so how do we go ahead
well we're going to use what you have
learned like uh induction and invariance
so let's do
it but before uh actually we do this
let's uh take this example that we
had and see how we can uh describe all
the transitions that we just did as far
as I remember them so we have that AAL 3
b equals five
right we start with empty
jugs we filled up the five gallon jug
right
then we started uh pouring the 5 gallon
jug as much as we could into the three
gallon jug so it's one of those rules we
got three and
two then we emptied the three gallon jug
we got zero and
two then we did what did we did next oh
yeah we poured everything in to this
one so we have two zero as the next
state
we filled up
um actually I'm forgot forgot exactly
what we did next but I think we filled
up the five gallon
jug and then we simply pull over as much
as we could from the five gallon jug and
we got three and four and here we are we
got four
gallons so what we just did is fully
described by this state machine so let's
now try to prove this theorem
so as I said we're going to use
induction so you always would like to
write this
out if you solve your
problems um what are we going to assume
well we
assume actually that M divides A and M
divides also B that's the assumption of
the theorem and now we need to prove
that M divides any result that we can
achieve in this state
machine so what's the invariant that we
are thinking
about invariant is going to
be um
oops is a
picate and it says something
like if the state
uh XY if this is the state after n
transitions then we would like to
conclude
that M divides both X and M divides y so
this is uh our uh our invariant and we
like to use is to prove our theorem so
how do we start usually right so we
always start with with a base State
great so let's uh do
it the base case is
uh well we start with the all zeros uh
like the empty
JS it's well and we also uh had paid a
little bit of extra attention to what
you mean by division over here we said
that all integers actually divides zero
so in particular m m divid 0 n z so the
very initial State 0 comma 0 is indeed
uh um uh complying to this particular
invariance so let's write it out so we
have the initial State 0 0 we know that
M divides Z and therefore we know that
uh P0 is uh true so that's great so the
inductive step how do we start the
inductive step step all the
time and we will assume actually P of n
right so let's assume
that and now we would like to
prove p and then n+ one so what what do
we really want to do we want to say well
we know that we reached a certain State
X comma y for which uh M divides X and M
divides y now we would like to show that
if we transition to the next state we
again have that same property that M
divides uh the number of gallons in both
jugs once more and then we can can
conclude pn+ one so that's uh how we
always proceed so let's see whether we
can uh write it out in a bit more formal
way um
okay so how do we go
ahead suppose
that X Y is the
state
after and
transitions
well what can we conclude well we have
uh the predicate PN the invariant so we
know that M divides X and M divides
Y and we concluded that because PN is
true so after another transition what
happens after another
transition so we can conclude that uh
the
JS uh are
filled by the different types of of of
numbers that we see here in this state
machine so let's write them out so after
another
transition
um each of the
JS is actually
filled uh are
filled with uh well either uh if I have
empty tis say zero Js zero
gallons a b X and Y I see appearing over
here and I also notice that I see x + y
and x + Yus B and X+ Yus a those are all
the different number of gallons that can
be in the J yes
please in our example problem and five
um in our example yeah that's a good
question so in our example problem of of
three and five it turns out that uh the
only number that divides both the three
gallon J and the 5 gallon J is actually
one so in our example we would have that
m equals 1 so uh uh over
here we have that only uh 1 divides a as
well as 1 divides B so m equals 1 in our
case but for example in the three gallon
jck in a six gallon J right we have that
m equals 3 like three divides three and
three divid six so those are the two
cases that we sort of look at right now
but we put it into a much more general
setting right we abstract away from the
actual numbers and use uh A and B as as
as as
representations uh are there any other
questions yeah so uh after another
transition each of the JS are filled
with well either zero gallons if we have
completely emptied them or we have
filled the first a gallon jug or it can
be B we also notice that it can be um it
can be X of course it can be y because
that's the state that we are in um we
can have x + y - A which appears over
here and x + y -
B so these are all the different number
um
possible number of
gallons the X Plus y oh yeah that's also
present uh is that
true yeah that's right it's X+ y so we
also have X+
y actually it's good to check that again
so we have zero X Y A I got those x + y
and x + Yus B and X+ Yus B
yeah so now we can start using our uh
our uh uh assumptions so what are they
we we have um that in order to prove
this right at the top over here we
assume that M divides A and M divides
B so we know that first of all mid zero
of course but we know that M divides a
we know that M divides B we have
concluded that M divides X and also M
divides y
so if you now use uh some facts about
the visibility on your handout which we
will not prove now but uh I think most
of them will be on your problem set
actually um we can conclude that also
linear combination of uh a b X and Y
will be divisible by m in particular M
will divide x + y m will divide x + y -
A and also x + Yus
B so we will conclude that
um M
actually divides any possible uh a
result so divides any of the
above and now we're
done why is that because we have shown
now that after the next transition after
we have reached XY after end steps then
in our n plus one
step all that we can achieve
is divisible by m so that's exactly the
invariant so we conclude that pn+ one is
true and so now we're
done are there any questions about this
proof so this is like the standard
technique that we try to use all the
time here in this class we will use it
in uh in in all the other areas as well
in graph theory in particular um and um
especially in number Theory we'll also
use it especially in this
class okay so uh let's apply this uh
theorem
um let's uh think about uh this movie
that we saw that's Die Hard number three
Die Hard number four came out and then
uh the cast got stuck in Die Hard number
five was a problem because um the rumors
were that in Die Hard number five they
had like like a 33 gallon
jug that's a lot and a 55 gallon
jug
so
Bruce has been training his muscles
because you can imagine those are pretty
heavy so if you want to pour one into
the other my goodness
so but the question is is he training
the right
muscles so can we apply this uh theorem
now and show that uh so oh I I should
tell you what what is the problem well
again he has to get say four gallons out
of this out of these two
jugs so is that
possible it's not I see someone shaking
his head do you want to explain
why um A and B are are both divisible by
11 yeah so any other configuration will
also have to be divisible by 11 four is
not divisible by
exactly of course not the visible by 11
so the whole cast got blown up in Die
Hard number five and so we have no Die
Hard number six six as
well okay so
uh so now all of this stuff actually
helps us to Define A New Concept as well
so let's do that um I'll put it up here
we will uh use uh the uh the terminology
uh
gcd of A and B as being the uh greatest
common
divisor
of a and
B so for example uh if we are looking at
a = 3 and Bal 5 well then the
gcd of three and five is actually equal
to one there's no other uh larger
integer that divides both three and
five uh and other examples are for
example if you have the
gcd of say uh 52 and 4
four well what's this equal to well this
actually is 4 * uh 13 this is four *
11 so four divides both this and both
this one but nothing larger can divide
both of those so we have that this is
equal to
four
um we will have a separate
definition that talks about this very
special case where two numbers if you
look at their greatest common device
um when that greatest common divisor is
equal to one we actually Define those
two numbers to be relatively prime to
one
another um so let's put that out over
here so that's another
definition uh we say that uh
A and B are relatively
prime if their greatest common divisor
is actually equal to
one now today we will not really use
this definition so much but it's
actually very important and we'll come
back to this next
lecture so if you now look at this
particular theorem over here
can we see a nice coroller of these like
a result if you think about this
greatest comma devisor well the greatest
common divisor of A and B divides both A
and B so the greatest common divisor of
A and B will divide any result that we
can
generate by playing this game with the
Jes so the coroller here is that the
gcd of A and B divides any
result okay so that's really
cool so this already tells us quite a
bit about this game that we have here so
now what we would like to do is to uh
find out uh what exactly can be reached
we have a property that we have shown
here but um what else can we do here now
turns out that we can say much more and
we would like to prove the following
theorem to make uh to analyze this whole
thing much better I don't think I need a
state machine anymore so let's take that
off
um the theorem that we would like to
prove is
that any linear combination of the
uh let's change this into the three and
five again any linear combination of
three and five I can get I can make with
these three and a five column a gallon
jerk so let's write it out
so any linear
combination L which we write as some
integer s * a plus some integer T *
B uh so any linear combination of A and
B uh with well of course the number of
gallons should fit uh the largest uh jug
so with zero is at most L is at most V
can be reached
so this theorem we would like to prove
now and in order to do that we would
like to uh already uh think about some
kind of a property that we have so so
when we talk about linear
combinations um the S and the T can be
negative or positive we really don't
care so for example we could have like I
don't know umus 2 time so for example 4
is equal to -2 * 3 plus um actually is
that true yeah plus 2
* 5 so here we
have S to be equal to minus 2 and T is
equal to 2 and of course a is equal to 3
right and b equal to 5 is equal to five
so four is a linear combination of these
two and according to the theorem we can
create that number of gallons in this J
and we already saw that because we did
it but um for our theorem in order to
prove this we really would like s to be
positive so how can we do that does
anybody has an idea what we could do oh
does this assume that b is greater than
a yeah we have still that a suppos we
will we will assume that throughout the
whole lecture
thanks so in order to prove this we
really would like to have s positive so
let's just play around a little bit with
linear combinations to get a little bit
of a feeling for that how could we write
four differently as a linear combination
of three and five such that we have
actually a positive number over here
does anybody see another way to uh to to
see
that yeah that's true three 3 -
- 5 so and how did we do that well we
can just add say 5 * 3 to this one and
then subtract the same again - 3 * 5
over here then if you add those things
together you will see 5 - 2 is 3 * 3 as
you said and we have - 3 + 2 is actually
-1 * 5 and this will be a different
linear combination of four so what we
can do here we can sort of play around
and make this s over here which we now
say call S Prime is
positive actually it's larger than
zero so let's uh start a proof for this
uh
theorem it's pretty
uh amazing to me actually that you can
do so much with a game like this and see
so much
happening so let's uh figure out how
this
works
okay so let's first formalize this
particular trick over
here and how do we go ahead with it uh
well notice
that uh we can rewrite L which is equal
to S * a + T * b as um you know we can
just add a multiple of B over here and *
B say time a and we can subtract that
same amount over here minus M * a * B so
do you see what I did over here I have
added m * B * a and subtracted M * a *
b um and we did something similar over
here not exactly the same right but
that's what we did and um you can
imagine that we can choose M such that s
+ n * B will be larger than zero we can
do that so essentially this proves to us
that there exists an S Prime and also a
t Prime such that L can be be Rewritten
as a linear combination S Prime * a plus
T Prime * B but now with the exra
property that S Prime
is actually
positive now this is really uh important
because we're going to create an
algorithm of playing with those jugs
that can achieve this particular linear
combination and that's how we're going
to prove this
theorem so
let's
assume that uh 0 is less than L is less
than B I know that we in the theorem we
also consider the cases L equals z and L
equals B but those are obvious right it
can either empty the jugs or just fill
up uh the the bigger one so we will
consider just this
case all right so what's the algorithm
going to do for us
the
algorithm is going to repeatedly fill
and pour out JS in a very special way
and miraculously we will be able to uh
get the desired linear combination every
single
time and of course you're going to to
use induction again to prove this uh
property okay so how does the algorithm
work well to
obtain um L
gallons we are going to
repeat S Prime Times which is uh the
number that we have over
here the following
uh uh algorithm
we first of
all we will fill uh the
AJ that's
one after we have done this we're going
to P this into the BJ so how do we go
ahead we
pour oops this into the
BJ
and when uh this bej uh comes full we're
going to pour it out so let's write it
out so
when
um it
becomes
full it will
actually empty it
out and we will continue pouring the a
jug into the BJ so we'll continue this
process
so let's uh take an example to see how
that works so we keep on doing this
until the AJ is actually
empty so let's take an
example
um so let's
see let's do that over
here actually we can do it with the
tennis balls
too let's do that
first see how that
works
so essentially in order to get four
gallons we just fill up the three gallon
jug we empty it all in
here we fill it up again we pour in as
much as we can that's that's it we have
to empty this one
oops we have to keep on pouring put this
in
here fill this one
up and then P it over into the 5 gallon
jug and now we got five four gallons
over here so what did we do so let's
write it
out so for our special linear
combination over here we have that 4 = 3
* 3 - 1 *
5 so we need to repeat this process
three times so let's do that in our
first
Loop we will do the following we start
with the uh start State the pair 0
you're going to fill up the very first
jug all the way up to its capacity three
and we pull it all over into the BJ
what happens in the second
Loop the second Loop we again fill up
the a so we have we start with 0 comma 3
we fill it
up and we get three three the pair 3
three we pour everything in here as much
as we can that gives us 1A 5 only two
gallons are PED in into the bigger
gallon we empty the bigger gallon the
bigger jug we get one Z and we keep on
pouring and we get 0
one so now in the third Loop and that's
where we should get at the four
gallons we start off with
01 um we fill
up the AJ
we pull everything over into the bigger
jug and we get 0 comma 4 and that's the
end
result so this algorithm uh seems to
work for this particular example of
course you would like to prove it for
the for the general situation so how do
we do
it well we're going to just uh analyze
the
um uh the algorithm in the following way
um
we can notice that uh in this
algorithm we fill up S Prime Times the
AJ and we essentially pull everything
out um Into The BJs and we sometimes
empty the BJ so let's try to think about
this a little bit and see how we could
try to formalize this so let's write it
out we have filled uh the a
gallon
jug S Prime
times we also know that the B jug has
been emptied a certain number of times
so let's uh
um let's just assume suppose
that the
BJ is actually empti say U times
I do not know uh how many times but I
just say well let's assume it's U times
and then try to figure out whether we
can find some algebraic
expression
so at the very end of the algorithm let
R be what is in the B jug so let R
be the
remainder uh um in the B gallon
jug so now we can continue uh we know if
R is what is left in the B gallon jug
well we know already some property of it
um actually let's put it on the next uh
board we know
that zero is at most R and at most B
because that's what's left in the B
gallon jug right so we know these bounds
we have assumed that Z is less than L is
less than
b uh which we put over
there we uh know that R must be equal to
what kind of linear combination of S
Prime and uh and and and U so well we
have uh been filling the a s Prime Times
so this is what we added in water to the
whole uh system you can say S Prime Time
a and we ped out uh water well we did
that U times from the B gallon jug so we
put out U * B gallons so this is the
remainder that is left in this bigger
jug right so are there any questions
about this so
uh okay so we also know that L is equal
to S Prime * a + T Prime * B and this is
uh the linear combination that we would
try to uh prove of that it is uh left at
the very end so what we want to show is
that R equals l so how do we do that now
well we're going to show that
uh uh that R can be expressed in L in in
a special way so let's have a look so
these are all tricks
um in the sense that uh I'm giving you
this proof but how do you come up with
this yourself is sometimes you play a
lot with these kinds of things and you
get a feeling of what kind of uh uh sort
of pattern exists and what kind of uh
intuition you need in order to write
down a proof like this so let's uh uh
rewrite this I'm going to add T Prime *
B and I'm going to subtract it
again so I have S Prime * a plus T Prime
* B I subtract it again and I still have
this amount left over here so what is
this equal to well this part is equal to
l so this is equal to l minus and I have
a multiple of B which is p prime plus u
* V
H now this is very interesting does
anybody see how we could continue here
so we have R expressed as L minus a
multiple of B and I also know that L is
in this range also know that R is in
this range so that's kind of interesting
right so how can that
be what what what should be the case
here does anybody see what what kind of
property T prime plus u must must have
in order to make that
happen so let's have a look here we have
L it's in this range so let's just draw
an AIS so we have zero we have B and
somehow in this
range we have a
l now if I subtract like uh actually b
or something more than b or I add more
than B I will jump out of this this
range and I go somewhere over here or I
go somewhere over
there right so if I suppose L is over
here then L minus B would be over here
which would be negative or if I add B it
will be over here which would be more
than
b now we know that this is equal to R
but R is in this range so that's not
really possible so let's write it out so
if T prime plus U is unequal to zero so
I actually really subtract or add a
multiple of
B then I know that R is either smaller
than zero or R is larger than
b now we know that that cannot be the
case so we can conclude that t Prime + U
equals zero now that
implies that um T Prime equals minus U
um or maybe the other way around because
that's easier to see what's happening so
U equals minus t Prime if we plug that
in
here well we get exactly the same
expression you see minus minus t Prime
is equal to plus T Prime and we get the
exact same linear combination so we
conclude that R equals L and now we're
done why is that well we have show that
the very last number of gallons that is
left after this procedure after this
algorithm is actually exactly equal to
the linear combination that we wanted to
achieve so now we got the proof for this
theorem that tells us that
um that uh that any linear combination
is actually uh is of of of A and B can
actually be reached by pouring gallons
over and back and emptying and filling
those jugs
all right let's uh continue so there was
a question over here that I would like
to uh that I would like to
address um so maybe I did not make so
clear what uh what what the S Prime and
the T Prime is over here and um in this
proof we started off with this linear
combination I would like to have an
algorithm of pouring that creates L
gallons in say the bigger
jug so so in order to do that I want to
find uh say linear
combination that makes this L such that
this S Prime is an integer POS a
positive integer why do I want to have a
positive integer because in this
algorithm I'm going to repeat something
S Prime Times if S Prime is negative I
cannot do it right so S Prime has to be
a positive
integer in order to create uh such a
positive integer I can just add
uh like a th time B * a and subtract a
th * a * B that's okay I can just add a
lot and if I add enough I can make s+ M
* B positive even if s is say minus 100
well if I add 1,00 * 5 I will get a
positive number so that's sort of the
reason in this prove that we want to
rewrite the linear combination into a
new one such that this S Prime is
positive and if we have S Prime positive
then we can actually talk about this
algorithm because we can only repeat
something S Prime Times if S Prime is
say one or two or three or something
positive um all right so um let's um
talk about the next part so we have gone
uh we have proved two theorems but in
the end he would like to have a uh uh a
characterization of the greatest common
devisor that's the goal of this lecture
so let's do
it
um in order to do this um let's uh first
of all uh look at our five gallon and
three gallon example we know that the
greatest common advisor is equal to one
um we know that uh one can be Rewritten
written as a linear combination is 2 *
3us 1 * 5 so that means that according
to the theorem that we have up here we
can actually uh make exactly one gallons
uh in one of these JS so that means that
we can also uh have any multiple of
those so we can reach any multiple of
one that's very special so in this
particular case we know that any
multiple of one any number of gallons
can be reached so can we sort of
generalize this a little bit uh by using
the greatest common advisor so the
greatest common advisor of three and
five is equal to one and we have shown
that the greatest common advisor divides
any result can we say something more can
we say that the greatest common devisor
can be maybe written as a linear
combination of this type of over there
and that's how we are going to proceed
now so let's uh
um talk about a very special uh
algorithm which is called uh ukls
algorithm and I think in the book it's
also called the
pulverizer and you will have a a problem
on this just to see how that works and
to really understand it so let's explain
what we want here so first of all uh we
know that uh for any b and a there
exists a unique quotient and remainder
are so let's write it
out there exists
a
unique uh Q which we will call the
coent and r
we'll call this the
remainder such
that b equals um Q *
a plus
r uh with the
property that uh zero is at least R and
at most
a so we we're not going to prove this uh
this statement it's actually like a
theorem right but let's just assume it
for now and in the book you can read
about
it
um we're going to use this to prove uh
the following Lemma that you will need
to give a characterization of the
greatest common devisor as a linear
combination of of uh of
integers um oh before I forget we will
will denote this remainder as
RM of um B comma a and this is the
notation that we use in this uh in this
lecture so what's the Lemma the Lemma is
that the greatest common divisor of A
and
B is equal to the greatest common
divisor of the
remainder of b and
a uh with a so what did we do let's give
an example to see how this works um for
example let's take um actually let's do
it on this
whiteboard so let's
see for example let's see whether we can
use this to calculate the greatest
common divisor of
105 and
224 so how can we go ahead
well according to this LMA we can
rewrite this as the greatest common
advisor of first the remainder
of 224 after dividing out as many
multiples of 105 as
possible and
5 so what are we going to use here we're
going to use that
224 is actually equal to 2 * 105 + uh
14 so we have the gcd of 14 and
105 now why can I do this well um I'm
essentially just subtracting uh like 2 *
105 from
224 well the greatest common devisor
that divides 105 and
224 also
divides uh 105 and a linear combination
of5 and 224 that's essentially what we
are
using uh and that's actually stated in
this Lama and that's what we would like
to
prove so let's continue this process and
uh do the same trick once more so we can
say that we can rewrite this as uh the
greatest comma
divisor of well the remainder of
uh 105 after taking out as many
multiples of 14 as possible and
14 so what are we going to use over here
we we are going to use that 105 is equal
to uh 7 * 14 +
7 so this is the greatest common divisor
of seven and
14 now if you just continue
this process we can see that this is
equal to the greatest Comm divisor again
of the remainder of now 14 after
dividing out as many multiples of
seven with
s now this is
equal to 0 comma 7 why is that because
14 is equal to 2 * 7 + 0 so 0 is the
remainder after dividing out uh seven as
many possible times is possible okay so
we have the greatest comma device of 0
and seven what's the largest integer
that can divide both zero and seven well
any integer can divide SE zero so we
know that this is equal to seven so
essentially what we have done here we
have repeatedly used this particular
Lama to compute in the end the greatest
common
divisor uh of uh 105 and
224 and we have uh been very methodolog
we we use this a specific method we used
the
LMA and we worked it out we use the LMA
again and we just plugged in the actual
numbers use the LMA again plugged in the
actual numbers and so on and this is
what is called uet's algorithm and in
the book it's also called a pulverizer
and it is I think a few other
names but I like this
one so this is an
example of of uet's
algorithm so now let's um have a look
whether we can uh prove uh this
particular
Lama
and um actually I
will yep we're going to prove this
Lama okay
so how do we do the proof well first of
all we know that uh if uh yeah well how
do we do this we would like to prove
that if the gr well if if M divides A
and B in particular the greatest comma
devisor divides A and B we would like to
show that it's uh dividing also the
remainder of B after dividing out a and
a
itself if we can show that then we know
that the greatest common divisor of this
thing is at least what we have over here
so I said a lot right now so let's try
to write it out a little bit so suppose
that m is any divisor of
a and at the same time M also divides
B
well then I know that m also
divides B minus say the quotient q that
he had over here time
a and uh and this is actually equal to
the remainder of b and
a now we also know that uh M divides a
so what did we show here we showed that
if M divides A and M divides B then M
also divides the remainder of B and A
and M divides a so what does this prove
well it proves that in particular the
greatest common divisor over here
divides this one that's interesting that
essentially means that we have shown
this
inequality because um if this one
divides this well that means that this
number over here must be at least what
we have over here
okay so let's uh
continue
um we consider two cases if the
remainder of b and a is unequal to
zero well what can we say now um we can
say that uh if I know that M divides uh
this
remainder of B and A which can be
Rewritten as B minus Q *
a u and I also know that uh if I also
know that mides
a then this actually implies uh the
reverse of this statement that M divides
A and M divides B now why is that well
we're actually using the fact that if
mides B minus Q * A and M divides a then
M also defies any linear combination of
these two in
particular this plus Q * a which
is b m divides B so maybe I'm going a
little bit faster I notice um this all
also has to do with all the uh uh at
your hand out you see a few facts on the
visibility in a particular item number
three uh talks about um the fact that
I'm using here if aides B on on your
hand out and aides C then I know that
aides any linear combination of B and
C so that's essentially what I'm using
here
repeatedly
okay
um so let's look at uh the other
case if the remainder is equal to
zero well then uh I actually know that
b - Q * a is equal to
Z well if I know that uh M Ides
a uh well then uh then since 0 equals uh
B minus Q * a I know
that b = q * a so if n divides a I also
know that M divides
B so this is one argument this is
another one and this
was these are the three arguments that
now show that uh anything that divides
these two also divides A and B so now we
have the reverse argument right so the
this greatest common divisor divides
this one here and this one and we just
proved that it divides A and B and so it
must defy the greatest common devisor of
A and B so now we have shown the other
inequality and this proves equality so
you should definitely look look this up
in your lecture
notes um so now we can finally prove uh
this beautiful
theorem uh that will help us to
characterize
uh the uh actually let me put this over
here so the final theorem that we prove
here is that
uh the greatest common
divisor of A and B is actually a linear
combination of A and
B so we're going to use this algorithm
that we have over here um ukids
algorithm and um we are going to do a
proof Again by induction and we use an
invariant so we
use
uh a similar kind of strategy of
course the invariant that we're going to
use
says
well if ukets
algorithm
reaches uh the greatest common divisor
of X and Y so for example it reaches say
seven or 14 and 105 for
example
then say after end
steps then both uh X and Y are linear
combinations of uh A and B so then X and
Y
are linear
combinations of A and
B and at the same time we also know that
the greatest common divisor of A and B
is equal to the greatest common divisor
of X and Y so this is my
invariant and uh the way I will go ahead
is to uh simply do what what we do
always in these system situation so we
start with the base case and we can
immediately see that after zero
steps um in the ukian algorithm I've
done absolutely nothing so uh
obviously after zero steps xal a y
equals B so of course they are linear
combinations of A and B and this
equality hols as well so for the base
case
so after zero steps we immediately know
that p 0 is
true now for the inductive
step we have to do a little bit
more
um as usual right we always
assume PN and now we would like to prove
PN + one so how do we do this well um we
notice that there exists a
q such that the remainder of Y and X is
equal to y - Q *
X so we assume PN we have reached some
State X comma y we know that remainder
of y x = y - Q * X for some quotient
Q uh we know that y linear combination
of of of of of A and B and X's as well
so that means that this one is actually
also a linear
combination of A and
B so now when we look at this algorithm
we can see that uh
that if you look at the remainder that
appears in here that's still a linear
combination of A and B so after an extra
step we notice that what we have reached
are still linear combinations of A and B
and of course the uh dma has showed has
has has shown us that um that what we
reach is still equal the greatest common
devis is still equal to what we
originally started out with so this
proves uh P of n + one
so and that finish this particular
proof so for the very uh last step if
you now look at this particular uh uh uh
uh so if we look at the very end we
notice that in every step the remainder
is getting smaller and smaller and
smaller
right and you can use a similar kind of
proof technique to show that after a
finite number of steps we will reach a
gcd of 0 comma y something like this so
in the very last step of UK's
algorithm we achieve something of this
form we now use our uh our predicate
over here and say that Y is a linear
combination of A and
B but the the greatest common devisor of
0 comma Y is also equal to the original
greatest common devisor that we want to
characterize
so now we have proved the theorem that
says that the greatest common divisor of
A and B is actually a linear
combination so now we're going to
combine all those three theorems in one
go
and that will show
us the final result
which is that
um the theorem that the greatest common
devisor of A and B is actually the
smallest
positive linear
combination of A and
B so we going to combine all of these
together we know that the greatest comma
devisor divides any
result the theorem up there says that
any linear combination can be
reached and we also just shows have
shown that the greatest common devisor
is a linear combination of A and B so we
can combine those three to get this
theorem so how do we do it well let's
just look at zero all the way up to B
suppose these are all the
results that we can reach in our uh
problem we know that the greatest common
devisor divides all of
those at the same time it's also linear
combination that's over here since it's
a linear combination it can also be
reached right by the theorem that we
have so suppose that this is the
greatest common
advisor but we also know that the
greatest common advisor is Def is is is
div and all of these points here that
can be reached so therefore it must be
the smallest
one and I will leave you with some
homework to think about it very
carefully and you can show for yourself
that you can now combine those three
arguments together and see that the
greatest commis must be the smallest
positive linear
combination so I will see you next
Thursday